FM2 is ascii plain text.
It consists of several key-value pairs followed by an inputlog section.
The inputlog section can be identified by its starting with a | (pipe).
The inputlog section terminates at eof.
Newlines may be \r\n or \n

Key-value pairs consist of a key identifier, followed by a space separator, followed by the value text.
Value text is always terminated by a newline, which the value text will not include.
The value text is parsed differently depending on the type of the key.
The key-value pairs may be in any order, except that the first key must be version.

Integer keys (also used for booleans, with a 1 or 0) will have a value that is a simple integer not to exceed 32bits
 - version (required) - the version of the movie file format; for now it is always 3
 - emuVersion (required) - the version of the emulator used to produce the movie
 - rerecordCount (optional) - the rerecord count
 - palFlag (bool) (optional) - true if the movie uses pal timing
 - fourscore (bool) (*note C) - true if a fourscore was used 
 - port0, port1 (*note C) - indicates the types of input devices. Supported values are:
     SI_GAMEPAD = 1,
     SI_ZAPPER = 2
 - port2 (required) - indicates the type of the FCExp port device which was attached. Supported values are:
     SIFC_NONE = 0

String keys have values that consist of the remainder of the key-value pair line. As a consequence, string values cannot contain newlines.
 - romFilename (required) - the name of the file used to record the movie
 - comment (optional) - simply a memo. 
     by convention, the first token in the comment value is the subject of the comment.
     by convention, subsequent comments with the same subject will have their ordering preserved and may be used to approximate multiline comments.
     by convention, the author of the movie should be stored in comment(s) with a subject of: author

Hex string keys (used for binary blobs) will have a value that is like 0x0123456789ABCDEF...
 - romChecksum (required) - the MD5 hash of the rom which was used to record the movie
 - savestate (optional) - a fcs savestate blob, in case a movie was recorded from savestate 

GUID keys have a value which is in the standard guid format: 452DE2C3-EF43-2FA9-77AC-0677FC51543B
 - guid (required) a unique identifier for a movie, generated when the movie is created, which is used when loading a savestate to make sure it belongs to the current movie.

The inputlog section consists of lines beginning and ending with a | (pipe).
The fields are as follows, except as noted in note C.
|c|port0|port1|port2|

field c is a variable length decimal integer which is a bitfield corresponding to miscellaneous input states which are valid at the start of the frame.
Current values for this are
MOVIECMD_RESET = 1

the format of port0, port1, port2 depends on which types of devices were attached.
SI_GAMEPAD:
 the field consists of eight characters which constitute a bitfield.
 any character other than ' ' or '.' means that the button was pressed.
 by convention, the following mnemonics will be used in a column to remind us of which button corresponds to which column:
   RLDUTSBA (Right,Left,Down,Up,sTart,Select,B,A)
 This seemingly arbitrary ordering is actually the reverse of the originally-desired order, which was screwed up in the first release of FCEUX. So we have preserved it for compatibility's sake.
SI_ZAPPER:
 XXX YYY B Q Z
 XXX: %03d, the x position of the mouse
 YYY: %03d, the y position of the mouse
 B: %1d, 1 if the mouse button is pressed; 0 if not
 Q: %1d, an internal value used by the emulator's zapper code (this is most unfortunate..)
 Z: %d, a variable-length decimal integer; an internal value used by the emulator's zapper code (this is even more unfortunate..)
SIFC_NONE:
 this field must always be empty.

* Notes *
A. There is no key-value pair that indicates the length of the movie. This must be read by scanning the inputlog and counting the number of lines.

B. All movies start from power-on, unless a savestate key-value is present.

C. 
If a fourscore is used, then port0 and port1 are irrelevant and ignored. 
The input types must all be gamepads, and the inputlog will be in the following format:
  {player1  player2  player3  player4}
|c|RLDUTSBA|RLDUTSBA|RLDUTSBA|RLDUTSBA|port2|
If a fourscore is not used, then port0 and port1 are required.

D. The emulator uses these framerate constants
  - NTSC: 1008307711 /256/65536 = 60.099822938442230224609375
  - PAL : 838977920  /256/65536 = 50.00698089599609375

E. The author of this format is curious about what people think of it. Please let him know!